I was asked to come up as the
technology manager for Mac OS X.
My primary responsibility is actually
working with all the Core OS developers,
including those doing
file system plug-ins,
network extensions, drivers,
anything else in that area.
Plus,
I also come over some additional areas.
I was asked to come up here to
give a short two-minute talk.
However, Brett, the main speaker,
gave me some conditions.
I could not reuse my
Kentucky Fried Chicken Mach kernel joke.
I couldn't do any magic tricks.
I couldn't do any bad jokes
like the CoreOS Core OS.
So I have another minute and a half.
Now, I do actually want to stress that
I'm glad to see we actually have a
fairly full room for this session.
Apple views with Mac OS X the
importance of having a strong
foundation for the core,
for Mac OS X having a strong foundation.
As a result, we've spent the last, what,
three, four years now actually
working at building up a good,
strong foundation.
If you went to the Bertrand session,
you saw the one slide he had
about the collapsing building.
And if you know anything about
earthquakes and so forth,
one of the major causes for
building collapses is actually
a weak or poor foundation.
We don't want our buildings collapsing.
So as a result,
we're putting a strong foundation,
but at the same time,
we want to make it flexible
so that you can actually
enhance it with your products.
If you notice this year,
we actually have several
sessions dedicated to
developing down at the Core OS.
Unlike last year,
we had like maybe some overview sessions,
this year we have several sessions,
including several sessions
dedicated to the I/O Kit.
So we really believe in the importance
of you working down at that area.
So to cover the Core OS and to give
you an overview of what's down there,
what you can develop on,
and where you should attend
the rest of the week,
I'd like to now introduce the director
of the Core OS engineering team at Apple,
Brett Halle.
Brett?
I appreciate you being good this year.
Good afternoon.
So, let's start with what is Darwin?
We've talked about the Core OS,
we've talked about Darwin.
So I want to stress early
on here that Darwin and the
Mac OS X Core OS are synonymous terms.
The Darwin is the Core OS of Mac OS X.
So throughout the sessions
that you'll hear this week,
you'll hear these terms
used interchangeably.
And I think it's important to note
that these are equivalent terms.
You'll hear Darwin used usually
in reference to the fact
that the OS is open sourced.
You can grab the source
to the operating system.
You can get the source today off
of the our open CVS repositories
at www.apple.com/darwin and you can
download and access the source to the
DP4 release that you've got today.
So if you want to actually
see what's part of the OS,
what it is that makes up the system,
it's there and available.
So it's really important, again,
to stress that you will see
these terms used interchangeably.
So now that we know that,
how in the world do you
describe what the core S is?
I tried to explain to my mom,
mother-in-law, what an OS was.
It's real easy to talk about
Aqua and the Finder and things.
They're very visual things.
But the OS isn't very visual.
And in fact, if we're really,
really doing our job well,
you really don't even know we're there.
The whole point is that we're
supposed to make the system so stable,
so robust, and just so cool that it
just does the right thing.
But as a result of that, we're very,
very invisible.
So I was scratching my head over
the past couple of weeks trying
to describe what type of metaphors
you can use to describe an OS.
And it's actually very difficult.
Certainly, it's a strong foundation.
It also provides plumbing for the system.
It basically is responsible for all
that infrastructure stuff that you
would expect as part of the system,
but you don't ever see.
Most of these things in your normal
life you don't ever worry about or see,
but it's really ultimately what makes
for a good building or a good system.
A good environment.
So what I do want to get into
though is what the technology
is that makes up this system.
We'll try and get away from the
metaphors a little bit and focus on
exactly how this system is built.
One thing that's very unusual and
interesting about the Core OS is
that we've taken a very unique
approach to the architecture.
Instead of just using kind of
one piece of code or one piece
of technology that we developed,
we actually went out and gathered
from multiple best of class
technologies in the industry.
For example, we use Mach,
we use BSD cores,
there's a number of other pieces
of technology that we've gone
and actually gathered together to
build the Core operating system.
It's also based on proven technology.
A lot of this stuff has had literally
thousands of man years of investment
in development and testing.
So this isn't just stuff
we came up with overnight.
There's been enormous amounts
of mileage on this technology.
Things like BSD, of course,
runs the Yahoo websites,
and they certainly take an
enormous amount of stress and hit.
I think even more interesting
is there's an enormous amount of
untapped potential in this core.
Everybody has heard a lot about
all the excitement with the UI,
with our application toolkits.
And one of the things that we really
haven't stressed a lot is all that
stuff that's under the covers,
that's down in the core of the system.
And I think, frankly, this is where,
as we move forward for Mac OS X,
where a lot of the untapped
potential exists for applications.
So in terms of the services
that the Core OS provides,
certainly it is responsible
for the preemption and memory
protection model for the system.
It actually provides
multiple address spaces.
So each application that
runs on the system is in its
own separate address space.
So that if you have an app
that tends to go run wild,
write all over memory,
it'll ultimately hit the edge.
The kernel itself will actually trap
that condition and kill the application.
You won't actually be in a situation
where your application can bring
down other apps on the system.
The Core OS supports the
application environments.
Our key role in the system is to make
sure that the application environments,
Carbon, Cocoa, and Classic,
run as efficiently and
effectively as they can,
that we support ways for those
environments to communicate with the
outside world and between themselves.
Our job is to make sure those application
environments are just top-notch.
The Core OS is also
processor independent.
For those of you who were just
at the open source session,
we demoed the Darwin,
the open source component
that's available out on the net,
actually running on Intel.
Now,
this is not the Core OS for Mac OS X,
not all of Mac OS X,
but just the Darwin piece,
the open source piece of Mac OS X is
actually up and running on Intel.
We've done that,
put some effort into that to actually
make sure that our OS architecture is
as flexible and as well-designed as
we can because we want to make sure
that the OS is as flexible as possible.
The Core OS is a very important
component of the future,
and as the future progresses and
as processor technologies evolve,
that we have a very
flexible architecture.
It's also high performance.
That's the marketing term they
insisted I put that in there,
but it really is important
that we consider performance
a very key part of the OS,
and we'll talk a bit more about
that in terms of how we actually
support that in the system.
Flexibility is also key.
Because we support multiple
application environments,
we deal with things such as
processor independence and an
unknown quantity of new hardware
and things that come into play,
flexibility as part of the
architecture is critical.
And you'll find in a number of
the subsystems that that plays
a very key role in how we've
approached certain problems.
And of course, scalable.
This same core that we use for our client
operating system is the core that we
use for our server operating system.
So it is pretty critical that we
have some scalability potential in
the technology that exists here.
Of those of you who have used
the Mac OS X server product,
which is based on a
slightly older code base,
but we'll be syncing up
in as we move forward,
that, you know,
we perform incredibly well for things
like as a web server and for stream,
as a quick time streaming server.
I mean,
it's a scalability in the technology
such as networking and file systems
and I/O that really make that work.
And of course,
I think it's really important to know,
because we're an OS,
that buzzword compliancy is
a real critical part of it,
certainly if in networking.
So you'll hear a lot of these today.
So to look at the Core OS kind of at the
grand perspective in the architecture,
you'll see,
of course I think it's kind of
the proper scale that has been
applied here in terms of importance,
that where we sit in the system
is below the core services.
And the core services are
things such as Core Foundation,
Quartz, all the services necessary to
support the graphical user interface.
The application services themselves that
support Classic and Carbon and Cocoa,
those are all above us.
We have a very layered
system for Mac OS X,
and I think that's pretty important
in terms of how you look at this.
This is not just a random
collection of shared libraries.
This actually follows more of
the conventional onion skin,
if you will, model.
Within Darwin or the Core OS,
there's a number of key technologies.
The Mach microkernel, I/O Kit,
and the drivers that are part of that.
The BSD kernel,
our file system support networking,
including Apple Talk and IP.
And we'll go into each
of these in some detail.
First, let's talk a little bit about
the Mac microkernel and how
it plays into the system.
One needs to consider
Mac really as an OS foundation.
It's responsible,
its role in the system is to manage
the processor and the memory resources.
It deals with scheduling, handles all the
preemptiveness in the system.
It deals with the
threading of the system.
I think it's very important
to note that for Mac,
the threading granularity
is done at the thread level.
This is particularly important
because as you write applications
that are multi-threaded,
the threading services and the
scheduling is handled by the
current microkernel itself.
It also is responsible for memory
protection and memory management,
including handling things
like backing store for VM.
All of that is managed by Mac.
One other aspect about processor
scheduling that I think is
important to mention for Mac,
it's very critical that we've considered.
From an architectural standpoint,
being able to deal with
multiple processors as well.
Mac is responsible for,
on a thread by thread basis,
being able to schedule threads
across multiple processors.
Mach is also,
because of the level that exists at,
the way of communicating between
address spaces or between
tasks is through IPC or RPC.
And this is a very key part
of Mock's architecture.
And if you get into
more detail around Mach,
you'll see what a critical
role the fact that it's a
message-based architecture is.
Mach is policy neutral.
I think it's particularly
important to note.
Down at that level,
all it's really doing is managing
the processor and memory.
Beyond that, it doesn't worry about I/O,
it doesn't worry about users,
it doesn't know anything
about file systems.
Basically, it doesn't provide all those
high-level OS services.
Its role in the system is just to
control the processor and memory.
For Mac OS X,
the technology we used for Mach was
basically Mach 3.0 plus a bunch of stuff.
We based it on work that
was done in the past.
We've done a lot of work on
the OSF research institute.
And in fact, we did some investing,
have been investing in the research
institute for a number of years,
even a couple of years before Next was
acquired for evolving the Mach 3.0 work.
Plus, obviously, in the past few years,
we've done quite a bit of
work on this ourselves.
That, as I mentioned,
inter-task communication
is done through messaging.
And you'll find that as part of Mach,
there's this untyped IPC and RPC model
that is critical to its design.
Architectural support for SMP in
real-time is another key feature of 3.0.
SMP is something that was really
designed into Mach from day one.
And it's something that we've
really made sure that we've
continued to move forward.
And you'll see, as I mentioned,
that scheduling is done on
thread-by-thread basis across processors.
In addition, real-time is a serious
consideration for us.
There's a lot of work
yet to be done here,
because real-time,
as it's been done for Mach 3.0,
from the Research Institute in
CMU and others,
has been focused mostly towards things
like weapon systems and stuff like that.
Since we aren't really considering
using Mac OS X for nuclear deployment,
our focus is very much more on how
we can take some of that real-time
technology and evolve it towards
multimedia and other real-time needs,
audio, things like that.
So, I think that's the first
thing that we're going to do.
The pager and the mechanisms for
dealing with VM are also part of Mach.
So the external pager is
another key feature of 3.0,
as well as a strong modular architecture.
For those of you who have followed Mach,
Mach 3.0 was originally designed
in the research community
to be a true microkernel,
in the sense that it was all
that was responsible down at
the kernel level and everything,
including all the rest
of the OS services,
were up in user space.
That is not a model that
we've used for Mac OS X.
It is not a very efficient
way of approaching things.
But that modularity that's been
designed into Mach is something
that we've really tried to leverage.
So you'll see that for Mac OS X,
that the OS architecture and its
use of Mach more closely matches a
monolithic architecture with the way
BSD and Mach and iOS system and the
file systems all tightly integrate with
Mach in the same kernel address space.
We do that for efficiency.
And it's a very key part of our design.
But we have kept the modular architecture
of Mach such that the interfaces
between those components are very clean.
If you're interested in finding
more about the Mac kernel,
there's a session on Thursday bright
and early in the morning
over in the Civic Center,
and I encourage you to go to that.
So, one other aspect that I wanted
to get into here is that we've
really factored performance as a
key part of the OS architecture.
You'll see as you look into
the Darwin source code,
or as you start playing
with some of the tools,
that we've actually plumbed
the OS for performance.
There's lots of counters and tools and
entry points specifically for gathering
performance data and information.
And this is particularly helpful for
us in terms of how we tune the system,
how we evolve it, and probably, I think,
more importantly, is how you,
the developer,
can get involved in making sure
that your apps are using the OS in
the most efficient way possible.
There are some really cool
tools available on the system,
and they're shipped with DP4.
And to show us a couple of these tools,
I'd like Joe Sokol,
who's the manager of the
Core OS Performance Group,
to join us and show us some cool stuff.
Okay, am I live?
Yep.
All right.
Yeah, so could we put the two screens up?
Anyway, so I'm going to show you a couple
of tools that are not real fancy.
They're command-line-based tools.
We chose to do them this way so
that they'd have as little impact
on the system as possible while
you're actually using the tool
to kind of view what's going on.
And they're used for the first
one we're going to look at is top.
And, you know,
it's kind of a traditional Unix tool for
looking at what's going on in the system.
And what I thought I'd do is
just show you three different
ways you could use this tool,
at least the one that we've done,
to get some insight as to what's
going on in the system and also to
help you track things like potential
memory leaks or other resource leaks.
So just to get started here,
I'm going to show you how to
use the tool to actually capture
a picture of all of the...
resource consumption, system calls,
things like that that are used
during the launch of an application.
It's kind of an interesting view into
what goes on kind of system-wide,
right,
outside of your own application space.
So this particular option for top
It's just the minus A flag,
and basically it's going to accumulate
all these different counters.
So there are counters
in here for page faults,
page ends, BSD system calls,
Mach system calls,
pretty much context switches,
pretty good view as to what's going on,
the amount of CPU time,
percentage of CPU time,
networking counters,
and disk counters for both numbers
of IOs and the total amount of
data being read off the disk.
Joe, I hate to interrupt.
Just for clarity,
you might talk about this.
Okay, sure.
What's on your screen?
So this guy over here,
the screen over here on your right,
the audience right,
is where the particular
tool is actually running,
and you can see all the different
columns there that we're about to hit.
And then over here is just going to be on
your left will be the actual application.
Point size on the terminal.
Excuse me?
Pump up the point size on the terminal,
please.
It's not going to fit width-wise,
so sorry.
So over here we're going to
just launch the TextEdit app.
As that launched,
we just captured a whole
bunch of information.
Then you could stop at this point
and basically go take a look
at what you did to the system.
Let's say it was your app
that you were working on.
You could see not only
what your app did directly,
but indirectly it may cause some of
the other system services to fire,
like the Window Manager or Pasteboard
Server or some other service that
is done as a separate process.
Then another way to use the tool, OK,
with the minus D option basically
gives you similar sets of counters,
but this is now done as a
delta for each sample period.
So this is a good way to see what's
going on in the system when you just
grab a window and just kind of shove
it around so that you can discover
what system services become active
when you're doing something like that,
or if you're to go up to the menu
bar and sort of drag across there,
you can see that mainly it's
going to be the app and the window
manager doing something like this,
which is kind of what you'd expect.
There's also a little bit of networking
traffic that's showing up there
because we're actually telemedded
in remotely to the other systems,
so again,
to minimize the kind of intrusion of
the tool on the system that you're
actually trying to take a look at.
These first two uses of the tool
are really more toward finding
out performance-related things.
How busy is the system when
you're launching the app?
What type of resources are you using?
What other services are
you getting involved?
These are more hints for you to be
able to go back and play with and
use these tools in terms of gaining
visibility into what's going on.
The final interesting way to use
Top is as a method for watching for
memory leaks and also for port leaks.
Ports are the basic mechanism and
naming convention in the Mac OS X.
The most common use of the
framework is to use the for
establishing your IPCs and RPCs.
Most of you probably won't ever
really program to that level directly,
but an awful lot of the services
that you use in these frameworks
indirectly cause ports to be allocated,
messages to be sent around.
If you're forgetting to release those
particular uses of the framework,
particular functions or whatever that
require you to close things down,
this particular view of Top can help you
see that something wrong is going on.
Over here, let's start this over.
And again,
we'll just go ahead and launch that app.
And you can see that there's a
delta columns that are showing
up like on the port usage.
So the window manager picked up 11 ports
due to the launch of this particular app.
Some of the other guys,
TextEdit itself as it was launching,
once we actually captured and
actually started to account
for the stuff that's going on,
picked up an additional 37 ports.
Over on the right-hand side,
you have all of the information
about your memory usage.
So there's--again, distinguish between--
The virtual size of your applications
and the actual resident size,
which is an important concept.
We provide a fair number of
different views into that.
The interesting one,
all the way over to the right,
is again a delta, which if that were to
continue to grow over time,
might be a good indication that
you have a memory leak that
you'd want to do something about.
When we quit the app,
then we should see most
of these things disappear.
Window Manager went back to
his baseline in terms of the
number of ports that he's using.
So when we quit that app,
everything nicely released.
Looks like the dock and pasteboard
server is still hanging on to
a port that was probably set up
to communicate with that app.
All right, so that's about it for TOP.
So those are three interesting views.
And then one other tool right now,
which is a tool called SC Usage,
which will give us a little
bit more of an in-depth view
into exactly what's going on.
This is kind of-- TOP is kind of a
nice tool for looking at things in
a general way and seeing everything
that's going on in the system.
But we can't provide too much detail
on every single app or every single
process that's running all at once.
So SC Usage is a tool that allows
us to get a little bit more
visibility into what's going on.
And let's just pick one
of the running apps,
like the Dock.
take a look at that.
Of course,
these command line tools all have man
pages in the system and they have little
helps that are associated with them.
But if we go over here to
the dock and just start kind
of playing around with it,
you get an idea.
Here's all the different system
calls that are being executed,
the number of system calls that
are being executed during that
little bit of activity that I did
in terms of making the dock active.
The tool also shows you how much time is
being spent outside of your application,
so both in system idle
and in system busy.
Some of that time that's accumulating
there would have been like in
the window manager or other
services outside of your app.
The tool will show you how many
page faults were taken for that
particular application during that,
again, the time that we're sampling.
It also shows down at the bottom
that we actually have three threads
that make up this particular tool,
or make up the dock, and that we're going
The relative priorities.
These would be the scheduling
priorities in the system.
And also, the cumulative wait times.
So this is like a really well-behaved
application since we're not
doing anything with it right now.
All three threads are just
waiting for something to do.
They're not polling.
They're not waking up to kind of
see what's going on in the system.
So a good target for everyone is to write
an app that when you're not using it,
when it's just sitting there,
basically does nothing,
has no impact on the system.
And with this SC usage tool,
you can actually see that occurring.
These tools are going to be
gone over in a little more
depth in session number 195,
which is Thursday at 4:00.
So I think that's enough to whet
your appetite for right now.
We're going to do one more
tool a little bit later on.
Thank you, Joe.
Okay.
Thank you.
I think it's particularly
important to note that as you're
writing applications for Mac OS X,
that there are some very important tools
available in the system to give you
some idea of what the impact of your
app is and ways that you can tune it.
Since under Mac OS X you
don't have the issue,
for example,
of having to pre-allocate the amount
of memory for a given application,
things like the fact that you can
actually have memory leaks that
just continue to grow and grow and
grow and grow are something that you
actually need to watch for and test for
before you release your applications.
So, let's spend a moment now and go
over I/O Kit and our driver story.
I/O Kit is a framework,
in the true sense,
for easy development of device drivers.
It provides the mechanisms
for plug and play,
as you would expect from Apple,
but it also provides some
other core services that are
necessary to support devices.
Things such as power management down
at the actual architectural level,
dynamic device management,
the ability for things to truly
come and go in the system,
hot plug ability and such.
And a very modular and
extensible environment,
because we don't even know what the next
device is that might come down the chute.
So we really need to be prepared
for a very flexible environment to
be able to support these things.
It provides the abstractions for most
of the device classes in the system.
Certainly all the standard things,
things like mass storage
and SCSI and ATA and stuff.
I/O Kit does not provide abstractions
for some very high-level devices,
things like scanners and printers.
Those are actually done
within other groups,
specifically as part of
the graphics environment.
I believe there are a number of
sessions that go over those elsewhere.
The focus for I/O Kit is primarily
in devices that actually represent
tangible hardware that we touch directly.
Key features of I/O Kit are, again,
it is a framework in the sense that, one,
it is object-oriented,
and I think that's important
to note that part of its design
architecture was to really provide
this like in App Kit or in Cocoa,
to be able to have a
framework to leverage off of.
It deals with a lot of the standard
mundane things that you would
expect that need to be done for I/O.
It provides a lot of the common kernel
services that you needed to work and
talk with the device and to talk and
communicate with the rest of the system.
Protocol specifics, however,
are divorced from the core framework
of I/O Kit and are dealt with
in something called families.
Families provide the different kinds
of protocol that you would expect
in very different kinds of devices.
Certainly,
SCSI and audio are very opposite
ends of the spectrum in terms of
the ways that you would use them.
One's a bus and one is, you know,
has issues of dealing with
volume and there's a whole
bunch of issues that are very,
very different between these
two classes of devices.
And the family portion of
I/O Kit really deals with providing
mechanisms to be able to deal
with those protocol differences.
The actual device specifics
themselves are captured in drivers.
And this is the part that most people
will be dealing with as they port
their piece of hardware to Mac OS X.
Drivers are those pieces that actually
got in touch with the hardware directly.
All of this, by the way,
for the most part,
lives in the kernel itself.
And a driver, drivers and families and
things like that tend to,
are all very low level OS services.
There are mechanisms that
I/O Kit provides and the
families provide for being able
to communicate up to user space.
Your applications in Mac OS X cannot
talk to hardware directly.
You must go through I/O Kit or through
a driver or some other abstraction
to be able to deal with that.
In DP4, it's important to note that we,
actually a little while ago,
released an early DDK.
It's part of what we call
the Kernel Development Kit.
There's actually a series of
services that are part of the KDK,
and that was something that shipped
about two or three months ago.
It is also part of DP4,
so on your disk you should see
quite a bit of information on that.
And it's, of course,
part of Darwin and Open Source,
including things like documentation.
Documentation for IOCit is done
through something called HeaderDoc.
And if you were at the
Open Source session,
there was a little bit
of information on that.
But it's what we used to embed
documentation and services
within the actual source code
itself and produce a very,
very cool format for being
able to browse API information.
Also, as part of DP4,
you'll see some of the early parts
of some of the power management
work that we've been doing.
There's a lot of stuff we've been doing.
Kind of back at the lab
that isn't part of DP4 yet.
That stuff is coming, but as part of DP4,
things like shutting down the display,
spinning down the disks,
things like that are part
of something you expect.
For those of you who are interested
in more on power management,
this is something that
will be coming post-DP4.
There are a lot of families
that are part of I/O Kit today.
And I believe we have something on
the order of eight or nine different
sessions this week to go over a
number of the I/O Kit technologies,
things like USB and FireWire.
I encourage you to actually go to the
I/O Kit overview tomorrow afternoon.
All the detailed sessions
will be described and more
information about I/O Kit.
We could spend the entire session
just going over this subject alone.
[Transcript missing]
It provides all the OS personality,
if you will,
APIs and services for the system.
BSD handles things like file systems
and networking in terms of it being
really part of the BSD environment
in terms of how that is exposed.
It provides the basic process model,
the concept of users and
security within the system.
It also provides the security in
terms of from both the user by user
basis in terms of how it's managed
also through the file system.
BSD really is responsible for
much of the very high-level view
that everybody sees in the system.
There's a number of pieces
that compose the BSD component,
if you will.
One is the system framework.
This is basically the set of libraries
that actually expose the system APIs.
In addition,
as part of the system framework,
there's other OS personality
services that are provided,
various other libraries,
things like the math library
and the standard C libraries
and things like P threads.
That's all part of the system framework.
As you're interested more
in the system framework,
we'll be talking more about that
at a BSD session later this week.
There's also the BSD user environment,
which is the command line and shells
and all the bazillion tools and things
that are part of that environment.
This is a particularly set of powerful
facilities that are available.
Brett Halle,
Joe Sokol This is a particularly
set of powerful facilities
that exist in the system.
These are tools and services that are
available to you as the developer.
As we'll talk about later,
this is not something that we
will be exposing to the end user,
of course.
This is not exactly the
best user experience.
There's an enormous amount of power here,
both as you're developing
your applications,
just as the tools that we've shown you,
for example,
and as ways to debug them and manage them
and actually extend your applications
in pretty new and exciting ways.
Brett Halle, Joe Sokol
If you're interested in
more information on BSD,
both at the kernel level and at the
BSD command line environment level,
please join us on Friday, 3:30.
We'll be going into a
lot more detail on that.
File Systems.
File systems is something that
everybody here will be dealing
with in one form or another.
And of course,
it's not just one file system,
but a set of file systems.
And this is a very powerful part
of the BSD kernel environment.
It provides all the access to disk
and even network file system services.
It's important to note that the file
systems architecture that we have is part
of the current BSD kernel environment.
So you'll find as you're
working with file systems,
there's a lot of dependency
with that environment.
Again,
how the process model works and how the
APIs and things interact with each other.
It's based on the BSD VFS architecture,
but we've extended it in order to be
able to take advantage of certainly
things like HFS+ capabilities and things
that we think are pretty Apple unique.
The VFS design is a very
layered architecture.
It has the ability to take file
systems and stack them to provide
a number of unique capabilities.
It also can support
numerous file system types.
In fact, in DP4 we support HFS,
HFS+, UFS, ISO 9660, NFS.
There's also an early version of an AFP,
Apple Share IP,
file system as part of DP4.
The file system,
in terms of its development environment,
we package up as part of our KDK,
our kernel development kit.
There's a whole series of services that
are part of doing development within the
kernel in terms of ways to extend that.
We'll talk more about that a
little later in this session.
In DP4, I think it's important to note,
for those of you who have been
following Rhapsody and Mac OS X,
that for DP4,
HFS+ is our primary file system format.
There's a number of APIs that have been
extended to be able to support HFS+
effectively and to even extend them
to use some of the real raw power that
exists in HFS+. Things like long file
names and some of the other services that
are part of HFS+. As I mentioned already,
our server team has already added some
support in DP4 for the Apple share IP.
You should actually look into that,
but it is, to be noted,
a pretty early drop of this code.
This is something that we wanted
people to start working with,
but it is headed to some issues.
This is client, yes, absolutely,
as someone kindly pointed out.
Also, there is within the file
system APIs pretty universal
support for Unicode names,
specifically UTF-8.
For those of you that are dealing with
this and want more information on this,
be sure to go to the session.
This is obviously of particular
importance to worldwide deployment.
One other area in DP4 where there's
been some interesting development
is permissions on removable media.
Because of being based on BSD and
the BSD file system architecture,
there's this concept of
BSD file system security,
the concept of a user and groups
and the ability for read and write
protection on a file-by-file basis.
Removable media brings some
interesting problems to the space,
which is when you get
the disk from somebody,
what permissions and users are
actually associated with that
particular removable device?
There's been a lot of interesting
work done here for DP4,
and I believe that will be discussed
also a bit in the file system session.
This is something that we think
is obviously unique to a client
system that isn't typically dealt
with on a server environment,
for example.
Another area of key development for
DP4 is the unified buffer cache.
Again, this is kind of an OS-y,
holy grail item, but it's been very,
very important to how we deal with
things like unify the way we deal
with map files versus standard
read and write access to files.
In typical OS architecture,
the map files are dealt with by the
VM system and the read and write is
dealt with purely by the file system.
There are situations where
these two views of files,
particularly if two people
are accessing them in two
different ways at the same time,
where they can actually
become out of sync.
There are lots of clever ways
that OSs have approached dealing
with this particular issue.
We think we've done a
particularly excellent job in
dealing with this for Mac OS X.
If you're interested in file systems
and how they fit into Mac OS X,
please join us Wednesday at 2:00 p.m.
We'll go over UBC and a number
of the other aspects and how to
write a file system for Mac OS X.
I'd like Joe to join us one more time and
share with us one other performance tool,
particularly one that relates
directly to the file system usage.
Okay.
Okay, so one more tool to show today.
This one, again, in terms of a strategy
that you might apply,
you might have run top initially,
kind of checked out that a particular
process seemed to be doing a lot of
system calls or seemed to be taking
an awful long time to do something,
but maybe wasn't really
banking a lot of CPU time,
right?
So you might suspect that instead
of chewing up a lot of CPU,
you're just waiting for IOs to occur,
and you'd probably be right.
So we have a tool called FS Usage that
gives you a lot more visibility into
what's going on in terms of access
to the file system and also other
types of system calls that tend to
cause you to wait for things to occur.
And the tool also will track,
will show you where your page faults are
occurring that actually cause disk IOs,
where you actually have to go to
the disk to page in as opposed to
maybe just finding it in your cache.
And again,
those are instances in time that
could cause your application to look
choppy if there's a lot of paging
activity going on at some point,
or if you have a lot of file system
activity that's concentrated in a
particular area could cause a lot
of time to elapse where the app is
waiting for that IO to complete.
So what we will do is,
go ahead and bring up our
friend the TextEdit app again.
[Transcript missing]
We're going to go ahead and
take a look at text edit.
And so he's just sitting
there doing nothing.
But if we go over here and let's
go ahead and see about opening
up some kind of a document.
So what's going on there?
That's probably-- that's not your
app doing all those opens and LStats,
which are the equivalent of in
Git Adders and the Mac OS 9 world.
That's a lot of the frameworks
actually going behind your back
and doing a lot of work for you.
So just that simple act
of bringing that panel,
you can see we caused a whole
bunch of activity to occur.
Now, what we're showing you
here over on the left
The Core OS X is going to be
the actual time of day clock
out to millisecond accuracy.
Then you get the name of the system call
that's being executed at that point.
Then some additional information.
We provide the file handle,
file descriptor in Unix parlance
that is being used or being returned.
Then the I/O size.
Again, that's an important thing to take
a look at within your own app when
it actually starts making those
requests because lots of small,
discrete I/Os aren't
nearly as good as nice,
big, large,
fat I/Os that get a lot of work
done all within a single call.
We also provide up to the last
28 bytes of the path name that's
being actually referenced.
That will be the last 28 bytes
so that it tries to give you a
sense of what the path name is.
as much uniqueness as possible.
Then over here in this column is the
amount of elapsed time that occurred to
actually execute that particular call.
If it has a W tagged on it-- I didn't
see any in this particular session
yet at this point-- that would
be indicative that you actually
waited for that I/O to occur.
So most of these are very fast,
down in the sub-millisecond range.
This is in microseconds here.
So these are like in 30,
40 microsecond kinds of ranges.
And then this would be the name of
the task that you're actually-- or the
application that you're looking at.
FS usage, you can look at multiple
applications at once.
So you could be watching this along
with some of the system services
if you wanted to see how they
were interacting with each other.
Let's just try one more thing over here.
Let's see.
How about documents?
Nothing there.
I guess this is all
going to be binary stuff.
Excuse me?
The Print Setup Panel.
Print Setup?
Print Setup.
What's that?
Okay, so just bringing up the print setup
panel causes it to go find a whole
bunch of stuff on the system for you.
Anyway, you get the picture.
The other...there's one with a...so
here's one that took a little
bit longer where we're actually
syncing something out to the disk.
There's actual IO that occurred there.
What this tool is useful for is, one,
again, gives you a lot of visibility into
what's going on in the system.
You get to see some of the things
that go on when you make those
very high-level toolbox kinds of
calls may actually trigger a whole
bunch of stuff behind your back.
It's important to know that,
that if you're having trouble
kind of determining where
the performance is going,
some of it might be that.
This is also a useful tool for
discovering where the IO is occurring
and where you're going to be actually
causing perhaps jitters or just
kind of breakups in the UI in terms
of having to wait for that IO as
opposed to just pure CPU usage.
Again, it's a tool that's meant more for
gaining some visibility into the system.
There are other tools that will be
talked about in that session number
195 that will help you drill down
into your application and actually
discover where in the application
these calls are being made,
which would help you to either
decide how best to use them or
perhaps manage to eliminate them if
they're causing too much overhead.
Thank you, Joe.
It should be noted that our
engineering management team in
particular loves running these tools.
This is a way that we actually kind
of get a handle for each build exactly
where we think there might be performance
issues or things in the system.
Certainly,
this is something we've found to be
very useful in being able to detect
things like apps that pull or where we
have leaks or where people are doing
things in a very inefficient way.
I think you as a developer should know
that these tools exist and there's a lot
of these cool tools in the system to use.
Moving on to networking.
It should be noted that
networking is also a component
of the BSD kernel environment.
In fact,
it's based on the BSD 4.4 TCP/IP stack.
In fact, over the past year,
we've spent some time and synced
that stack with FreeBSD 3.2.
There's a lot of very,
very cool stuff that's been going
on in the BSD community in terms
of evolution of the IP stack.
It should also be noted that the
APIs for dealing with networking
in Mac OS X are socket APIs.
There is an OT library
specifically for IP that can be
used for Carbon applications,
but the low-level services and
APIs for networking are sockets.
Key features of networking
for Mac OS X are IPv4 and
AppleTalk multi-homing,
routing services,
things like firewall and NAT are all core
services within the networking services.
There's a lot of very powerful raw
services that exist as part of Mac OS X,
a lot of which aren't directly used.
Right now, we're exposed in DP4
from a user perspective,
things that may be used more in a
server environment than they might
be used in a client environment.
But these are all part of
the core services that exist.
Networking is also part of our
Kernel Development Kit environment.
We'll talk a little bit more
about the specifics of how you
do development in this area,
but it's important that we
have three core technologies
that are part of the KDK:
I/O, file systems, and networking.
The mechanisms for being able to
get services in and out of the
kernel are based on this kit.
One key area where we've done
quite a bit of extension of the
basic networking services are
kernel extensions for networking.
Basically, the networking group has taken
the basic SOCKETS architecture
and stacks and provided mechanisms
for extending those stacks in very
important and interesting ways.
More ways than I can get into
in this particular session,
so this is where I strongly encourage
you to go to their session to see more.
Another key area of
support is that for DP4,
that the IP environment for both classic
and the rest of the OS are shared.
If those of you that use DP3 or use
previous versions releases of Mac OS X,
you actually had to set up multiple
IP addresses for the classic
environment and the base system.
That is no longer the case.
They actually share the same network.
Also, as I'd already mentioned,
there's an OT support
library as part of Carbon.
In fact,
if you have played it all yet with DP4,
I noticed during lunch a number of
you had installed it on portables.
Or you saw at the keynote,
IE5 is actually part of
the release DP4 product.
That all sits on top of the open
transport layers as part of Carbon,
which is part of our networking services.
That has really made porting of
applications to Carbon to be very,
very easy.
In fact,
the performance has indications that
we easily meet the performance of
Mac OS 9 for these OT interfaces.
In addition for DP4,
we have PPP now as part of the system.
There's an early UI and control
panel for setup and connectivity.
We'd certainly be interested
in your input on this.
There's also some extensions as
part of the OT services for being
able to use the OT services.
We've also got a lot of support
for the PPP connections,
and this is something that we'll be
doing more work on as we move forward.
Also, DHCP client and server
services are part of DP4.
You can actually set up your
DP4 system to auto configure
with DHCP and even provide those
services in a server environment.
That has actually been very important
in terms of being able to provide
ad hoc networks where you get just
two systems that connect together.
You don't have DNS services,
things like that.
There's a well-defined standard for that.
There's some really cool stuff
that's coming as we proceed
forward in the networking domain.
Support for mobility is, I think,
one of the most important
ones that is on the plate.
Specifically,
being able to change address
or configuration or things
like that without reboot.
Our intention is to take this even
beyond what has been done in Mac OS 9.
This is going to take us a while,
but this is something that we're
putting a lot of effort into.
As part of that are also some native
Mac OS X specific network setup APIs.
This has evolved from some of
the existing APIs that you may
be familiar with in Mac OS 9.
That's a key part of our mobility story.
IPv6 and IPsec is another
key area of technology.
This is certainly looking very forward
in terms of our networking technology.
During the networking session,
I think Justin and his team will be
going over where we're going with
that and how you can actually get
your hands on some of this stuff.
Whoa, looks like this one
didn't get set correctly.
There is a networking session,
an overview session.
Justin?
Tuesday at 4:30 in this room.
If you're interested in networking,
please come join us.
[Transcript missing]
Kernel extensions are the kernel
plug-in model that we use.
They're basically called,
as you'll hear them
referenced in other sessions,
KEXTs.
And they're bundles that contain
a property list and the binary
actually for use in the kernel.
There is a service called the
KEXT manager which actually auto-loads
and unloads these services as needed.
This is particularly used in I/O for
when a driver is needed on demand.
You plug in a USB or a FireWire
device or you have some new device
that is detected at boot time.
It's the KEXT manager which
auto-loads the necessary kernel
extensions to be able to support that.
There are a number of
manual tools as well,
so as you're developing
kernel extensions,
that you can actually manually load
and unload these things and protect,
actually work with them and test them.
Each kernel module actually
has two key entry points that
are common to all of them:
an initialized, which is called "unload,"
and a finalized,
called "just before unload."
All other APIs are very domain-specific.
So for I/O Kit,
there's a whole set of interfaces
that are driven around the
family interfaces between the
driver and the specific family.
For the kernel extensions,
there's a whole series of interfaces
that you need depending on where it is
you're plugging into the network stack.
And file system is part
of the VFS plug-in model.
So again,
for details on how these things work,
you need to go to the specific sessions.
There is also on the KDK,
which is again part of your
disk and on the website,
a Hello Kernel tutorial.
So if you want to actually get
familiar with how these things work,
you can actually play around with it.
Special things for
developing inside the kernel.
At this particular point,
you need to use our tools.
And mainly the issue here is
because of the way the ABIs and
things work within the kernel.
They're very specific.
They don't have all the dynamicism
that exists in user space.
We have very specific ABIs and
unfortunately need to use our tools.
C++ in particular is part of I/O Kit.
Until we resolve some of the ABI issues
with some of the other tool vendors,
this ends up being a problem.
Developing inside the kernel,
you need to do two-machine debugging.
Obviously,
you're inside the kernel space.
You're in a very protected context.
The only way to do debugging
at this is with two machines.
There are very limited programming
language features here within the kernel.
As I mentioned,
I/O Kit uses C++ as the way that
the frameworks are implemented.
But it's a very restricted usage of C++,
something that has been
actually termed as embedded C++.
But there are other programming language
limitations that exist within the kernel.
You are in a protected environment.
There is no direct user
interaction from within the kernel.
There are some interfaces and tools
for being able to do logging and to
be able to pass up things from the
kernel to the user space so that you
can get interesting interaction out.
But primarily,
you're going to be stuck doing debugging.
Resources within the
kernel are highly costly.
Certainly, allocating things in
interrupt time is a no-no.
Other,
they're very restricted usage situations
for being able to allocate resources.
And as a general rule,
anything that lives in the
kernel needs to be very,
very, very conscious about the
memory resources that you use,
because generally they
tend to be wired resources.
You're actually taking real memory
away from the rest of the system.
and failures in the kernel
environment are fatal.
This is why we don't want
people as a general rule to
be writing kernel extensions,
because it's at this environment
where you really are in
charge of the machine again,
and this is a real opportunity
here to pull the rug out
from under all those apps.
A key goal of Mac OS X is to
provide a robust environment,
and we need to make sure that code
and things that exist and run inside
the kernel are as robust as possible.
If you're writing code within the kernel,
you have that responsibility as well.
So I want to close with some
final things to think about.
One, I think I mentioned already that the
Unix experience is our intention for
Mac OS X is this is to be hidden.
This is not the goal of Mac OS X is
to be the next cool Unix box,
although it is very cool.
This is really an optional environment
for power users and developers,
you folks, but it's not something we want
to expose to mom or the kids.
This is not part of the new
user experience for Mac OS X.
So it's very important as you're
developing applications and using all
this really cool stuff that you are
very conscious not to expose that to the
people that are running your software.
They shouldn't have to manipulate
and edit configuration files.
They should never have to
deal with the command line.
Those things don't exist.
And in fact, our intention is that the
terminal application for user,
the user system will
actually not be included.
This is something that would
be an optional install,
not default install.
So don't depend on it.
Another key thing to think about is
using shared memory is dangerous.
One of the things that we found
is people have implemented apps
on Mac OS X that you're used to
Mac OS where you have access to the
entire address space of the system.
And so you take shortcuts about how
you communicate between separate
applications or shortcuts about
how it is that you interact with
multiple pieces of the system.
Be very conscious of the fact
that as part of the way of
keeping the system robust,
is to use some of the
protection that exists there.
If you go around and circumvent,
and we do have services for
being able to use shared memory,
every time you do that,
you're lessening the potential stability
of the system in your application.
So be aware of it and just
take that into consideration.
Always use the highest level
of abstraction possible.
We've talked today about a lot of
really cool technology within the OS.
But as a general rule,
you shouldn't start down at
the bottom in terms of the
APIs and services that you use.
You instead should use the application
services that exist as part of Cocoa,
as part of Carbon.
That allows you the greatest
amount of compatibility and the
greatest amount of portability.
There's going to be situations where
you need to use these services,
and that's okay.
But realize that you're
doing it with some cost.
You may be affecting the portability
and compatibility of your applications.
Carbon is a great example.
open source is a powerful tool.
As I mentioned,
all of this technology is open.
You can get the source to it today.
You get on the Darwin website.
You can look at it.
You can build the system.
It's actually possible to build a
version of the kernel that you can
replace with your existing DP4.
There's only a couple of
pieces that aren't included,
and those tend to be drivers,
for example,
that we don't own the rights to,
things like Adaptec drivers,
things like that.
But all the other key technology
that's part of the OS is
available as open source.
That means that you can find
out about how things work by
diving into it and looking,
that you can actually get involved,
and we want you to get involved in
helping make this a better product.
We've already gotten quite a lot
of changes and enhancements and
things from the Darwin community
become part of that community.
There's mailing lists and a lot
of other things that exist so
that you can get involved here.
This is a real unique situation
that we have in having,
you know,
basically one of the primary OSs,
consumer OSs, also open source,
and this is something you
should take advantage of.
In each of the sessions,
you'll actually hear some suggestions
about ways you can get involved,
and if you go onto our website,
you'll also see that there are some
interesting opportunities where if you
want to get involved more and contribute,
you can.
Last thing I want to leave you with
is that there's an enormous amount
of potential in this technology.
Everybody's busily and should be
busy right now worrying about how
do I get my app onto Mac OS X.
The next thing you might want to think
about is underneath Cocoa and Carbon,
there's some incredible power here.
And this is where I think the
next killer app is hiding.
The Mac OS X and the Core OS and
all this cool technology is where
we're going to be able to pull ahead
of the competition in a major way.
We have barely begun to tap
some of the potential here.
So something for you to think about.
I want to review real
quickly the roadmap.
There's a number of sessions
that you can get involved in.
Open source, we already,
unfortunately already had.
We talked a little bit about
the open source story and
how you can get involved.
There's a lot of this stuff on the web.
The IOCAT overview on Tuesday.
Networking overview,
we got it right here.
Tuesday at 4.30.
File systems, Wednesday at 2.00.
There's a birds of a feather session.
I believe we don't know exactly where,
what room it's in,
but it's Wednesday in the
birds of a feather sessions.
In the evening.
And this can be a lot more
informal communication and
ways that you can get involved.
The Mach kernel is on Thursday at 9 a.m.
The BSD kernel and user
environment is Friday at 3.30.
And there's also a feedback
forum Friday afternoon.
And if you've got questions,
feedback that you can provide,
I would strongly encourage
your participation there.